#Reference list

1. Harvard cours of Neorobiology fundamentals – https://www.mcb80x.org 
2. Articles:

* Lowe, R., Herrera, C., Morse, A., & Ziemke, T. (2007). [*The embodied dynamics of emotion, appraisal and attention. In Attention in cognitive systems.*](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BwvQgyvMme8cQkJBdmwwMFdOdUE) Theories and systems from an interdisciplinary viewpoint (pp. 1-20). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

> **Abstract.** Emotions can be considered inextricably linked to embod- ied appraisals - perceptions of bodily states that inform agents of how they are faring in the world relative to their own well-being. Emotion- appraisals are thus relational phenomena the relevance of which can be learned or evolutionarily selected for given a reliable coupling between agent-internal and environmental states. An emotion-appraisal atten- tional disposition permits agents to produce behaviour that exploits such couplings allowing for adaptive agent performance across agent- environment interactions. This chapter discusses emotions in terms of dynamical processes whereby attentional dispositions are considered central to an understanding of behaviour. The need to reconcile a dynamical systems perspective with an approach that views emotions as attentional dispositions representative of embodied relational phenomena (embodied appraisals) is argued for. Attention and emotion are considered to be features of adaptive agent behaviour that are interdependent in their temporal, structural and organizational relations.

* Lowe, R., & Ziemke, T. (2011). [*The feeling of action tendencies: on the emotional regulation of goal-directed behavior.*](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BwvQgyvMme8cQkJBdmwwMFdOdUE) Frontiers in psychology, 2.

> **Abstract.** In this article, we review the nature of the functional and causal relationship between neurophysiologically/psychologically generated states of emotional feeling and action tendencies and extrapolate a novel perspective. Emotion theory, over the past century and beyond, has tended to regard feeling and action tendency as independent phenomena: attempts to outline the functional and causal relationship that exists between them have been framed therein. Classically, such relationships have been viewed as unidirectional, but an argument for bidirectionality rooted in a dynamic systems perspective has gained strength in recent years whereby the feeling-action tendency relationship is viewed as a composite whole. On the basis of our review of somatic-visceral theories of feelings, we argue that feelings are grounded upon neural-dynamic representations (elevated and stable activation patterns) of action tendency. Such representations amount to predictions updated by cognitive and bodily feedback. Specifically, we view emotional feelings as minimalist predictions of the action tendency (what the agent is physiologically and cognitively primed to do) in a given situation. The essence of this point is captured by our exposition of action tendency prediction-feedback loops which we consider, above all, in the context of emotion regulation, and in particular, of emotional regulation of goal-directed behavior. The perspective outlined may be of use to emotion theorists, computational modelers, and roboticists.

* Kiryazov, K., Lowe, R., Becker-Asano, C., & Randazzo, M. (2013, August). *The role of arousal in two-resource problem tasks for humanoid service robots.* In RO-MAN, 2013 IEEE (pp. 62-69). IEEE.

> **Abstract.** A computational architecture of emotion is presented which grounds a component of an appraisal cognitive model into the homeostatic processes of a humanoid robot. The focus of the present work entails a `grounding' of the arousal component of the Pleasure Arousal Dominance emotion space into the electrical energy processes of an iCub robot. Key variables and performance criteria for robotic energy autonomous behavior in interaction with human are discussed. We show that our bio-inspired affective architecture offers viable basic cycles in exemplar “two-resource problem” testbed scenarios for a real iCub robot. The expression of the robot's emotional state and its role for the efficient interaction in the proposed two-resource problem task is discussed and experimental designs are presented.

* Kiryazov, K., Lowe, R. (2013). [*The role of arousal in embodying the cueXdeficit model in multi-resource human- robot interaction.*](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BwvQgyvMme8cQkJBdmwwMFdOdUE) 

> **Abstract.** In this paper is investigated the problem of managing limited resources in human-robot interaction with a computational architecture of emotion. The architecture is based on the appraisal theory of affect and an ethological motivational model of task selection. Key variables and performance criteria for robotic energy autonomous behaviour in interaction with humans are discussed. The role of arousal for modulating effort of movement is explored. It is shown that the architecture can manage task selection and the effort of the movement and offers sustainable basic-cycles in exemplar “two-resource problem” test-bed scenarios for an iCub robot. An extension of the architecture with a third ‘resource’ – safety – is presented and how the architecture is able to solve the new ‘three- resource’ problem is demonstrated.

* Lowe, R., Montebelli, A., Ieropoulos, I., Greenman, J., Melhuish, C. & Ziemke, T. (2010). [*Grounding Motivation in Energy Autonomy: A Study of Artificial Metabolism Constrained Robot Dynamics.*](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BwvQgyvMme8cQkJBdmwwMFdOdUE) In Proc. of the Alife XII Conference, Odense, Denmark.

> **Abstract.** We present an evolutionary robotics investigation into the metabolism constrained homeostatic dynamics of a simulated robot. Unlike existing research that has focused on either en- ergy or motivation autonomy the robot described here is con- sidered in terms of energy-motivation autonomy. This stipu- lation is made according to a requirement of autonomous sys- tems to spatiotemporally integrate environmental and physi- ological sensed information. In our experiment, the latter is generated by a simulated artificial metabolism (a microbial fuel cell batch) and its integration with the former is deter- mined by an E-GasNet-active vision interface. The investiga- tion centres on robot performance in a three-dimensional sim- ulator on a stereotyped two-resource problem. Motivation- like states emerge according to periodic dynamics identifi- able for two viable sensorimotor strategies. Robot adaptivity is found to be sensitive to experimenter-manipulated devia- tions from evolved metabolic constraints. Deviations detri- mentally affect the viability of cognitive (anticipatory) capac- ities even where constraints are significantly lessened. These results support the hypothesis that grounding motivationally autonomous robots is critical to adaptivity and cognition.



